The Russian invasion of Ukraine has caused major
disruptions to the supply of commodities. Both
countries are key exporters of energy and
agricultural products. The disruptions have
exacerbated existing stresses in commodity
markets following the recovery from the COVID-
19 pandemic, which saw rebounding global
demand and constrained supplies after 2020. As a
result, commodity price volatility has surged, with
food prices reaching levels not seen since the
2007-08 price spikes. Beyond their broader
impact on inflation, supply disruptions of key
commodities could severely affect a wide range of
industries, including food, construction,
petrochemicals, and transport. Concerns about
energy and food security have already prompted
ad hoc policy responses to bolster national selfsufficiency
and reduce energy prices for
consumers; however, these policies often fall short
of effectively solving the underlying problems.
Against this background, this Special Focus
addresses the following questions:
• What has been the near-term impact of the
war on commodity markets?
• What are the main lessons of past commodity
price shocks?
• What are the key policy implications?
The Russian invasion of Ukraine has been a major shock to commodity markets. The war has led to significant
disruptions to the production and trade of commodities for which Russia and Ukraine are key exporters. Prices
have risen sharply for all energy commodities and some food commodities, including wheat and oilseeds. This, in
turn, has raised energy and food security concerns, especially for the poorest households. In response to price
hikes, policymakers have often sought to provide relief to consumers via subsidies or lower taxes; however, these
are generally ineffective remedies and may exacerbate supply shortages. Policymakers can better mitigate the
impact of higher prices on low-income households through targeted measures, including cash transfers. Past
commodity price shocks induced policy and market responses that led to increased sources of supply and, for oil
price shocks, greater consumption efficiency and substitution away from oil. Over time, the recent spike in prices
will likely once again spur more efficient energy consumption and a faster transition away from fossil fuels,
particularly if supported by appropriate policy responses. Food production, at the global level, will also respond
to changes in relative prices. However, the uncertainties for food supply availability stemming from the war are
high, and low-income countries may have urgent needs for international assistance for a prolonged period.