The Russian invasion of Ukraine has caused major disruptions to the supply of commodities. Both
countries are key exporters of energy and agricultural products. The disruptions have
exacerbated existing stresses in commodity markets following the recovery from the COVID-
19 pandemic, which saw rebounding global demand and constrained supplies after 2020. As a
result, commodity price volatility has surged, with
food prices reaching levels not seen since the
2007-08 price spikes. Beyond their broader
impact on inflation, supply disruptions of key
commodities could severely affect a wide range of
industries, including food, construction,
petrochemicals, and transport. Concerns about
energy and food security have already prompted
ad hoc policy responses to bolster national selfsufficiency
and reduce energy prices for
consumers; however, these policies often fall short
of effectively solving the underlying problems.
Against this background, this Special Focus
addresses the following questions:
What has been the near-term impact of the
war on commodity markets? What are the main lessons of past commodity
price shocks? What are the key policy implications?
The Russian invasion of Ukraine has been a major shock to commodity markets. The war has led to significant
disruptions to the production and trade of commodities for which Russia and Ukraine are key exporters. Prices
have risen sharply for all energy commodities and some food commodities, including wheat and oilseeds. This, in
turn, has raised energy and food security concerns, especially for the poorest households. In response to price
hikes, policymakers have often sought to provide relief to consumers via subsidies or lower taxes; however, these
are generally ineffective remedies and may exacerbate supply shortages. Policymakers can better mitigate the
impact of higher prices on low-income households through targeted measures, including cash transfers. Past
commodity price shocks induced policy and market responses that led to increased sources of supply and, for oil
price shocks, greater consumption efficiency and substitution away from oil. Over time, the recent spike in prices
will likely once again spur more efficient energy consumption and a faster transition away from fossil fuels,
particularly if supported by appropriate policy responses. Food production, at the global level, will also respond
to changes in relative prices. However, the uncertainties for food supply availability stemming from the war are
high, and low-income countries may have urgent needs for international assistance for a prolonged period.
Amid overlapping crises over the past two years and the ongoing transition to lower
carbon intensity, commodity markets are being reshaped. COVID-19 highlighted
the volatility of these markets: global shocks can boost or drop prices sharply and
suddenly, with destabilizing consequences for developing economies. The war in
Ukraine has made the security of energy and supply chains a more prominent goal,
even if it entails higher costs. Efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are shifting
demand away from fossil fuels while increasing demand for the metals and materials
needed to build solar and wind infrastructure and battery storage. The sudden
disruption of natural gas markets, which have often been providing electricity base
load during peak demand, brought new concerns about grid stability, grid capacity
when adding intermittent renewables, and a global return to coal and diesel
electricity generation.
This book offers a comprehensive analysis of major commodity markets and
analyzes how changes in these markets affect the economies of developing countries.
Over the next three decades, the growth of global demand for commodities is likely
to decelerate as population growth slows, with many developing economies
maturing and shifting their demand mix more toward consumption and services.
The energy transition is likely to bring a major boost to metal-producing economies
because technologies related to renewable energy tend to be more metals-intensive.
The ongoing transformation of global commodity markets will have profound
implications for countries that depend on commodity production for economic
growth, exports, and fiscal revenues. Countries that depend on commodities
account for half of the world’s extreme poor. But the report suggests there may be
differentiation among exporters: fossil-fuel exporters could see a decline in revenues
while metals exporters reap windfall gains as the energy transition proceeds.
This study examines the factors that determine developments in commodity
markets and analyzes how changes in these markets can affect the economies of
commodity exporters and importers. The analysis is based on four broad
approaches. First, it studies the evolution of commodity markets over the past
century and identifies key drivers of supply, demand, and price movements across
commodity groups. The drivers include income and population growth,
industrialization and urbanization, technological innovations, and policy changes.
Second, it quantifies the relative importance of these drivers for different
commodity groups and concludes that income plays a crucial role in driving
demand for industrial commodities over the long term, while agriculture is chiefly
driven by population growth. Third, it takes a detailed look at the nature and
drivers of commodity price fluctuations. Fourth, it assesses the impact of
commodity price fluctuations on commodity exporters and importers.
Second, the study establishes that commodity markets are highly heterogeneous in
terms of their drivers and price behavior. Over the past century, agricultural prices
have declined in real terms, energy prices have risen, and the performance of metal
prices has been mixed. Further, the cyclical components of energy and metal prices
follow the business and investment cycles more closely than do most agricultural
prices. In part, this reflects differences in the drivers of demand for these
commodities—demand for energy and metals is much more closely related to
economic growth than is agricultural demand. The relationship between economic
growth and commodity demand also varies widely across countries, depending on
the country’s stage of economic development. At low levels of income, commodity
demand, especially for industrial commodities, rises rapidly with economic growth.
As incomes rise, however, growth in demand for commodities starts to slow.
Third, commodity price shocks have asymmetric effects on commodity exporters, in part
a reflection of the structure of their economies. Oil exporters tend to be less diversified
and rely more on petroleum for export and fiscal revenues than metal and
agricultural exporters do on their commodities. As a result, oil-exporting economies
may be more vulnerable to fluctuations in oil prices than other commodity
producers are to changes in the prices of the foods or metals they export. There are
also significant variations in the size, duration, and impact of price fluctuations
across commodities. Further, price shocks have asymmetric effects: large price
declines hurt growth in commodity exporters much more, and in a more lasting
manner, than large price increases benefit their growth. This asymmetric impact
requires policy responses that, in the midst of upturns, carefully prepare for
downturns.
Commodity markets are integral to the global economy. Developments in these
markets have major effects on the global economy. In turn, changes in the global
economy materially affect commodity markets. A deeper understanding of the
determinants of the supply of and demand for commodities can help clarify the nature
of commodity price movements and what drives them. Understanding those
determinants would also help assess how commodity market developments, such as oil
price shocks, affect commodity-exporting and commodity-importing countries. Such
analysis is critical to the design of policy frameworks that facilitate the economic
objectives of sustainable growth, inflation stability, poverty reduction, food security, and
the mitigation of climate change.
Several major events since the beginning of the current decade highlight the complex
and volatile relationship between commodity markets and economic activity. In 2020,
the COVID-19 pandemic triggered a sharp fall in global demand for commodities—
especially crude oil, which experienced its sharpest one-month price decline ever in April
2020. Prices subsequently rebounded, however, amid capacity constraints, supply
bottlenecks, and a strong economic recovery. In 2022, the war in Ukraine led to further
disruptions to commodity markets and more costly patterns of trade, with a major
diversion of trade in energy as Ukraine was unable to export grains while some countries
banned imports of Russian energy. The disruption also displayed how interrelated
commodity markets are—high energy prices pushed up the production costs of other
commodities (such as fertilizers), fueling a broad-based increase in commodity prices.
The increase in prices had major economic and humanitarian impacts, especially for
energy- and food-importing economies. In the longer term, the war may have
accelerated the energy transition as countries seek to reduce their reliance on fossil fuels.
Shifts in commodity markets pose challenges for emerging market and developing
economies (EMDEs). Commodities are critical sources of export and fiscal revenues for
almost two-thirds of EMDEs, and more than half of the world’s poor reside in
commodity exporters (World Bank 2018a). The macroeconomic performance in
commodity-exporting EMDEs and progress on poverty reduction in low-income
countries (LICs) historically has varied in line with commodity price cycles. This is
especially so for LICs that rely on a narrow set of commodities (Richaud et al. 2019).
Commodity price movements may present large terms-of-trade shocks for economies
that rely heavily on exports of a few commodities. For example, for an oil exporter, a
OVERVIEW
2 OVERVIEW COMMODIT Y MARKET S
fall in the price of oil causes a deterioration in the current account balance and puts
downward pressure on its currency. Absorbing these shocks can be particularly
challenging for economies with fixed exchange rates (Drechsel, McLeay, and Tenreyro
2019; Ha, Kose, and Ohnsorge 2019; World Bank 2020).
Commodity price cycles can lead to procyclical patterns in public spending. In other
words, fiscal policy often amplifies the impact of the commodity price cycle on
economic growth and increases the amplitude of cycles in economic activity (Mendes
and Pennings 2020; Riera-Crichton, Végh, and Vuletin 2015).
Commodity price cycles have often created credit booms and busts in EMDEs,
amplifying the macroeconomic effects. These usually involve international capital flows
and the supply of domestic credit. Commodity booms have frequently encouraged a
surge in capital inflows and a build-up of foreign currency debt by domestic borrowers
that proved excessive when the bust arrived (Masson 2014). Strong growth in domestic
credit, frequently denominated in foreign currency, has often exacerbated the
accumulation of risky debt (Koh et al. 2020). Capital inflows can cause a simultaneous
real appreciation of the domestic currency—whether through nominal currency
appreciation or domestic inflation—that reduces the competitiveness of the nontradeable
sector and holds back economic diversification (Ostry et al. 2010). Often,
surges in capital inflows and undue risk tolerance by lenders during price booms lay the
groundwork for systemic financial crises when commodity prices decline. Capital flight
adds to the damaging economic impact of a commodities bust.
Commodity price shocks can intensify global inflationary pressures. The oil price
shocks of the mid-1970s triggered a global increase in inflation that was only brought
under control in the 1980s after central banks imposed steep increases in interest rates.
Food price inflation can be an especially difficult challenge for LICs because food
constitutes a large share of consumption and food insecurity is pervasive. Following the
COVID-19 pandemic, reduced incomes and lost wages, combined with higher domestic
food prices and supply constraints, exacerbated undernourishment. The number of
people facing hunger globally increased from 650 million in 2019 to 768 million in
2020, undoing most of the progress achieved over the past 15 years (FAO 2021).
Climate change and the transition to more climate-friendly sources of energy add
another dimension to the uncertainties that roil commodity markets. Climate change
and more frequent extreme weather events are likely to affect the production of all
commodities. In what was perhaps a harbinger, in 2021 extreme weather disrupted the
production of many commodities: droughts reduced hydroelectric generation in several
countries including Brazil, China, and the United States; freezing weather and
hurricanes disrupted crude oil and natural gas production in the United States; floods
interrupted the production and transport of coal and some metals in Australia, and
drought in Brazil reduced its coffee production to historic lows.
The energy transition—intended to minimize the worst impacts of climate change—
will materially alter the production and consumption of commodities. Demand for
fossil fuels is expected to be flat or decline over the next 30 years, while demand for
COMMODIT Y MARKETS OVERVIEW 3
metals and minerals will be boosted by ramped up investment in renewable energy
infrastructure. The effects on agriculture are less certain and depend on the evolution of
demand for biofuels. The energy transition will also have major economic and
geopolitical consequences. Fossil-fuel exporters may see a decline in export and fiscal
revenues, while metal exporters could receive windfall revenues. Because metal reserves
are much more geographically concentrated than other commodities, the global
economy could be more at risk of supply disruptions. The energy transition could also
lead to additional energy price volatility in the short run if investment in fossil fuels
declines before there is sufficient alternative renewable energy capacity. Technological
innovation is likely to generate inherently unpredictable shifts in commodity demand
and supply. Thus, while the general nature of the energy transition may have a clear
endpoint (that is, reduced reliance on fossil fuels), the speed at which it takes place and
the implications for the demand for individual commodities are highly uncertain.
Main findings and policy challenges
This volume examines the channels by which developments in the global economy drive
commodity markets, and how changes in commodity markets can affect commodity
exporters and importers. The analysis in the following chapters encompasses four broad
approaches. First, it studies the evolution of commodity markets over the past century
and identifies similarities and differences among commodity groups. It shows that
several factors—such as income and population growth, industrialization and
urbanization, technology, and policy changes—frequently reappear as key drivers of
supply, demand, and price movements both across commodity groups and over time.
Second, it quantifies the relative importance of these drivers for different commodity
groups using an econometric model and concludes that income elasticity plays a crucial
role in driving the demand for industrial commodities over the long term. Third, it takes
a detailed look at the nature and drivers of commodity price cycles. Fourth, it assesses
the impact of commodity price fluctuations on commodity exporters and importers.
Main findings
The book offers a range of analytical findings:
The quantity of commodities consumed has risen enormously over the past century,
driven by population and income growth (figure 1). Demand for metals has risen tenfold,
energy six-fold, and food four-fold. The center of commodity demand has shifted
over the past half-century from advanced economies toward EMDEs. China, in
particular, has substantially increased its market share in both the production and
consumption of commodities—especially energy and metals—over the past two decades.
The relative importance of commodities has shifted over time, as technological
innovation created new uses for some materials and facilitated substitution among
commodities. For example, crude oil products replaced coal in transport in the first half
of the 20th century. Later, natural gas emerged as a major fuel for electricity generation
and heating. More recently, renewable sources such as solar and wind energy have
accounted for a growing share of global energy demand as the world shifts toward zero4
OVERVIEW COMMODIT OF MARKETS
Global consumption of metal commodities has grown in line with GDP while consumption of
agricultural commodities resembles population growth. China dominates the consumption of most
industrial commodities. Production has likewise seen a huge increase, assisted by technological
developments that have boosted productivity. Commodity exporters, particularly oil exporters, are
reliant on these commodities for export and fiscal revenue.